American Antiquity Reviewers' comments:

## Reviewer #1:

This is a very good paper that should be published. I have a few minor comments
and suggestions for revisions, but no major criticisms. The description of the
model is thorough, and I appreciated the fact that the authors were realistic
about the ambiguities and possible shortcomings of the model. I have some doubts
about the quality of the data, but models on this scale require working with
whatever data are available. There are also plenty of places where readers
should be at least a little skeptical about the details of the model, but the
authors have done a good job of anticipating potential questions, explaining
their decisions, and even pointing out ways to improve on the model (like using
actual site locations rather than aggregating site counts by watershed). I also
really appreciate the fact that the code used in the analysis is included with
the paper. I would have liked to have access to the data as well; I could have
done a better review if I could have been able to try replicating the analysis.
I hope the journal will make the code and data available as supplementary
material in formats that are easy for readers to find and use.

Here are my comments, roughly in the order they occur in the text:

I'm sure copy editors will catch this, but there are numerous problems
throughout the manuscript with extra spaces in words. Many of those extra spaces
are after hyphens, but they also occur in other places.

Page 5 in describing the extent of Fremont, "varying levels of support for
occupations in Idaho, Nevada, Colorado, and Wyoming", seems like a strange and
needlessly vague way to describe the situation. There is no question that there
were relatively sedentary farmers in far eastern Nevada (at least at Baker), or
that there was a smaller-scale occupation of (probably more mobile) farmers in
parts of Colorado. Idaho and Wyoming are different, in that I am not aware of
any evidence for farming, and there are questions about what occasional finds of
Fremont pottery there mean. I suppose it is accurate to say this is varying
levels of support for Fremont occupations, but I don't see any reason to state
it so unclearly when another sentence could clarify things.

On page 10, there are a couple of things in the project area description that
are not quite right. Despite what the text says, the Tushar and Pahvant
Mountains don't divide the Great Basin from the Colorado Plateau. The Sevier
Valley, east of those mountains, is part of the Great Basin (and a major center
of Fremont settlement). The description in the text left me wondering if the
Sevier Valley was included in the study, and even after looking at the map, I'm
not quite sure if the Sevier Valley is in the study area or not. The map in
Figure 1 is not easy to read, but it kind of looks like the Sevier Valley is
included on the map, but if so, why bring up the Tushar and Pahvant Ranges,
which are west of the Sevier. A clearer map would help, but if the Sevier Valley
is in the study area, the place names in the text are inaccurate (the eastern
boundary of the study area south of the I-70 corridor would probably be best
described as the Sevier Plateau). There is a similar (but less consequential)
issue with the southern boundary. The Pine Valley Mountains form a small part of
the border between the Great Basin and the Virgin River drainage, but they
aren't extensive enough to actually be the border.

Page 17, the marginal response plots are figure 4, not figure 3.

Page 18 why the parenthetical comment about lower canyons in the Uintas, which
aren't even in the study area?

Page 20 I agree that dry farming would have been nearly impossible across most
of the study area, and farmers would have had to access runoff somehow. But that
doesn't have to always mean irrigation. Planting in areas near streams where the
water table was high was probably a viable strategy in many areas, and (in the
right places) wouldn't require irrigation.

## Reviewer #2:

This manuscript develops and implements what for all intents and purposes is a
deconstructed, inductive species (i.e., "site") distribution model (SDM) that
evaluates the degree to which a variety of environmental parameters are
associated with Fremont sites, and ostensibly with Fremont farming. Paraphrasing
the authors' own words (on page 16), Fremont sites tend to be: (1) on federal
land that hasn't been all that affected by urban development, where
archaeological sites are less likely to have been destroyed, (2) in places that
are good for growing maize; (3) close to water; and (4) in areas with moderate
precipitation. I don't think anyone would be surprised by these findings (except
perhaps the last, which is interesting - why aren't sites in places with the
highest precipitation?), but the methodology they bring to bear is a sound and
interesting one that adds a lot of detail to our understanding of the ecology
operating behind Fremont settlement patterns. This is the best part of the
paper: a novel SDM-like approach that deals well with problems endemic to
spatial analyses (like autocorrelation) that ultimately points to the
environmental limits on agriculture in the arid West (and possibly other global
arid regions). I wish, however, we knew more about exactly what these limits
were: growing degree days, precipitation, and the like. As it is, this level of
albeit simple detail is omitted or simply not generated by their analysis. If
available, these types of data, clearly delivered, would make this paper far
more impactful, especially outside the realm of Fremont studies. To that end,
how do the data in this paper compare to the environmental limits on (especially
dryland) farming elsewhere?

Outside of the preceding suggestions, my main concern is with the archaeological
data and their generation, which gets pretty short shrift on pages 11 and 12.
This makes the analysis opaque and results in a very important question about
site types that I think needs to be answered (see the end of this paragraph).
What was the "previous" project? Is it citable? How was the sample stratified?
How do we know the sites are Fremont (and not, for example, Archaic or Ute)?
What were the database's attribute fields? Is it possible to provide a table
showing summary data from his database (I'm thinking something that shows
watersheds or a classification of watersheds cross tabulated with the frequency
or density of sites exhibiting telling attributes like "village," "hamlet,"
"rooms," or "small lithic scatter," for example)? To that end, recognizing that
not all Fremont sites are farming sites (villages, hamlets, irrigation sites,
etc.) but rather hunting and gathering sites (often small lithic scatters)
reflecting the other side of the Fremont forager-farmer subsistence economy, how
confident can we be that the environmental limits identified in the paper's
analysis are really on Fremont farming, and not on some other aspect of Fremont
settlement behavior?

A minor concern has to do with the authors' reliance on the IFD. The logic
behind the IFD is of course relevant and a useful heuristic device (though I
think the marginal value theorem or patch choice model could serve equally
well). But since this analysis doesn't rank habitat suitability or site
association with suitability, is all the fine grained detail (and the equation)
on pps 8-9 necessary for the reader to understand the idea that we'd expect to
see a higher density of sites in places that are less limiting to maize
agriculture? It seems even the simple ecological idea of limiting factors could
probably suffice. In fact, the logic behind the analysis the authors implement
might be contextualized within the literature on SDMs, e.g., Maxent, to equal or
greater effect.

Outside of the preceding, below are a handful of line item questions and
suggestions:

Abstract: "maize growing degree days" - awkward (for an abstract).

Page 4, top - are individuals always competing? Don't they also cooperate?

Page 4, 1st paragraph. This section on the IFD is OK, but it comes off a bit
awkward and unclear, especially in comparison to the clearer presentation
(albeit perhaps overly detailed) of the IFD starting on Page 8.

Page 4 - "reverse engineering" - it's really just induction.

Page 5 - Nevada Fremont - worth taking a look at Clint Cole's dissertation,
often overlooked.

Page 6 - Seems Noel Morss should be cited in here somewhere.

Page 6 - "farming-more-better model." The moniker is cute, but also silly. I'm
sure the authors can come up with something better.

Page 7 - capitalize 'Southwest' ...and "foraging-more-worse model" - same
comment as the preceding.

Page 8 - top paragraph. Note also how much foraging and hunting the Fremont did,
per Madsen and Simms 1998.

Page 11 - "traveling within watersheds than between them." I'm not sure this is
true, especially given that roughly Â½ of the Fremont adaptation was a mobile,
hunting and gathering one and, as Janetski and others have pointed out quite
well, the Fremont used the mountains separating valleys quite often and
intensively.

Page 11 - the "means" of what data?

Page 12 - the use of the term "site" on this page, and hereafter, is fine I
suppose, but from the way the author's describe it (relying mainly on houses and
rooms), it seems that what are actually being described are households. To that
end, how were roomblocks vs storage rooms delineated? It also seems a very large
lithic scatter with no house features might (and probably did) entail \>1
household, so site size for sites without houses is likely relevant. It's these
types of methodological omissions that recall my principal concern about the
opacity of the archaeological data and their generation.

Page 18 - "thin band around the lower slopes ..." - it seems these data are
readily available in this GIS - why not present them (i.e., density of sites in
different elevation bands)? Similar data presentations might be made about GDD,
precipitation, etc., per my comments in the first paragraph in this review.

Page 20, top - "suitability" ... "beyond the scope of the current paper" -
exactly my point about all the IFD detail in a paper that ends up not talking
about ranked habitat suitability.

Page 20 - "...irrigation would almost certainly have been a necessity" - a
testable hypotheses, which is the real value of inductive work like this.
Perhaps something worth alluding to.

Finally, it's a bit of a pet peeve of mine, so the authors can take this
criticism or leave it. The term "Goldilocks zone" reminds me of the oft and
overused "sweet spot" term used by Great Basin archaeologists for over 40 years
now to indicate a similar idea. This type of generalization has always bothered
me because, one, it occludes the very real, quantified parameters that make one
place better or worse than the others. And, two, these spots or zones are, as
this analysis has shown, places where limiting factors were just a little less
limiting than other places, showing just how close to the margins Fremont
farmers were operating, and how likely it was that that their subsistence
experiment would ultimately fail. In short, there were no "Goldilocks zones," -
almost no place was "just right" -- but rather some (but not that many, right?)
were just right enough, and then only slightly...at least until about 700 years
ago.

## Reviewer #4: 

Formatting/technicalities/small stuff: -There are some formatting /grammar
issues/spelling/punctuation (for examples words with hyphens in them: i.e.
Mod-els, sus-tained; References Cited spelled References Cites; etc.). I'm
assuming that the formatting stuff is just a result of bringing in the paper
from the authors word processing file to the journals format, but they should be
looked out for during editing. And a good copy edit to clean up all the other
minor issues would be helpful. -The references are not all complete. Many of
them lack the full citation in the References Cited section. For example, the
references for Barlow et al. 2008 doesn't give the papers title; or the
reference for Bellorado 2010 which doesn't give any publication information.
References need a thorough going through to catch all of these omissions. -Page
16: Sentence that says "thus confirming our expectation that more sites occur in
watersheds with a larger proportion of federal land." I would recommend
replacing 'occur' with 'have been recorded'. Because the point is that it may
not be that more sites actually occur in those areas, but that more have been
preserved and therefore recorded (thus possibly skewing our reading of the
archaeological record). Page 24: Acknowledgements, last sentence. "think" needs
to be changed to "thank"

Fremont related: -Most of the references for the Fremont discussions are
relatively old. Not that there's anything wrong with them, but there are some
newer discussions of Fremont that could be useful (e.g. Lekson 2014; Searcy and
Talbot 2016; Allison 2019; Talbot 2022). And Talbot 2000 is definitely a
reference that should be discussed, since 23 years ago he pointed out many of
the things you're pointing out in this paper. -Page 5: In the first paragraph as
you note a number of material traits historically used to distinguish the
Fremont from the neighbors, but don't specifically call out the biggest
behavioral - farming. That should at least be mentioned here. And because of
that, you can state "None of these, however, nor any combination of them, has
yet proven up to the task of bringing these diverse people under a single,
all-encompassing definition." True, there may not be a check list, but I think
most archaeologist working in the region understand that there are things that
distinguish them from their neighbors. Kind of like the supreme court Justice
Steward story of 'I can't define all the kinds of obscenity, but I know it when
I see it'. Most of the time we know Fremont when we see it. -Page 6: Second full
paragraph you state that most models explaining why Fremont maize farmers
emerged in the northern periphery have to do with economics and subsistence.
Yes, but what about topics related to other ideas of the spread of farming
systems, or that incorporate non-economic reasons for the spread of people
(Allison 2019).

Theory related: -Page 4: I understand that models and theories can't take all
considerations into account, and that a main tenant of Behavioral Ecology is
that people will act optimally, and therefore in your model you assume "that
whatever strategy - whatever habitat - the Fremont chose was the best
alternative available to them...given the constraints and trade-offs Fremont
famers face in those environments." I get the sentiment, but the idea that
humans will always make the optimal choice is problematic. We make non-optimal
choices all the time for a whole host of reasons. Which of course are hard to
model, and we generally try to make optimal choices, so therefore it makes sense
for HBE models to presuppose all choices made are optimal. But I think it worth
noting that the basic premise of HBE theory is very incomplete (even as I agree
with lots of it). All models are wrong, but some are useful. I think the authors
put forward a useful model, but I also think it worth pointing out that not all
sites would have been in the best habitat available to the prehistoric
inhabitants of the area. Sometimes they made mistakes and plopped themselves
down in a bad spot, the same way people do today. These homesteads may have only
lasted a season or two as the young Fremont farmer realized their piece of land
suffered from bad placement, but it happened. People don't make perfect
decisions all the time. But how do you model that? You can't, not easily anyway;
therefore it gets ignored. -Page 9: Second full paragraph. This might sound
confusing, so I apologize in advance. I'll try to explain as best I can. You
state "If we assume that the distribution of Fremont populations across habitats
is at equilibrium, then we can...". But can you assume that? Your Site Data
comes from NVCRIS and Sego, where you identified Fremont sites in the project
area. But you don't address the temporal aspect at all; meaning you don't have
dates for your sites; correct? So you're just lumping all Fremont sites into one
time period - Fremont. How then do we know that "the distribution of Fremont
populations across habitats is at equilibrium"? Equilibrium for when? You could,
for example, have two watersheds, both with 100 sites in them. But if in one
watershed the temporal distribution was 95 of the 100 sites being occupied
during a short 20 year time span, and in the other watershed the 100 sites were
evenly distributed throughout an 800 year time span, than that has huge impacts
on the idea of Ni and Si for the watershed; right? So I think the premise of "we
assume that the distribution of Fremont populations across habitats is at
equilibrium" is problematic. Preferably your thinking around this issue should
be explained in the article, or at a minimum this issue should be noted and then
given a disclaimer/assumption.

Big Picture: Much of the technical aspects of the model I am not qualified to
comment on; hopefully the editor has someone who is reviewing it for that. That
being said, some of the theoretical underpinnings have issues that should be
addressed, or at least better acknowledged. But overall I think most Fremont
archaeologists would agree with its findings and see that it supports what folks
have known for a long time (Lindsay 1986; Talbot 2000) - there is a sweet
environmental spot for farming in the region, and the Fremont being smart
farmers occupied those areas. Its larger strength is that it offers a slightly
different take on the spread and collapse of maize agriculture in the Fremont
region.

References:

Allison, James R. 2019 The Northern Frontier in the History of the Greater
Southwest. In Interaction and Connectivity in the Greater Southwest, edited by
Karen Harry and Barbara J. Roth, pp. 281-307. University Press of Colorado,
Louisville, Colorado.

Lekson, Stephen H. 2014 Thinking About Fremont: The Later Prehistory of the
Great Basin and Southwest. In Archaeology in the Great Basin and Southwest,
edited by Nancy J. Parezo and Joel C. Janetski, pp. 109-117. University of Utah
Press, Salt Lake City.

Searcy, Michael T., and Richard K. Talbot 2016 Late Fremont Cultural Identities
and Borderland Processes. In Late Holocene Research on Foragers and Early
Farmers in the Desert West, edited by Barbara J. Roth and Maxine E. McBrinn, pp.
234-264. University of Utah Press.

Talbot, Richard K. 2000 Fremont Settlement Patterns and Demography. In Clear
Creek Canyon Archaeological Project: Results and Synthesis by Joel C. Janetski,
Richard K. Talbot, Deborah E. Newman, Lane D. Richens, and James D. Wilde, pp.
201-230. Museum of Peoples and Cultures Occasional Papers No. 7. Brigham Young
University, Provo. 2022

Great Salt Lake Fremont and Forager Identities and Borderland Relationships ca.
A.D. 600-1300. In Casting A Wide Net. Papers in Honor of Joel C. Janetski,
edited by Richard K. Talbot, James R. Allison, and Charmaine Thompson, pp.
107-149. Museum of Peoples and Cultures Occasional Paper No. 20. Brigham Young
University, Provo, Utah.
